>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, DECEMBER 5: THE
TERROR INVESTIGATION INTO THE
SAN BERNARDINO MASS SHOOTING
TURNS TOWARD THE SUSPECT,
TASHFEEN MALIK; UNDERSTANDING
HOW THOSE LIVING IN THE UNITED
STATES MIGHT BE RADICALIZED; AND
A MOVEMENT IN PUERTO RICO TO
BECOME MORE FOOD-INDEPENDENT.
>> IT'S VERY IMPORTANT THAT
PEOPLE GET BACK TO THEIR ROOTS
AND THEY LEARN HOW TO DEAL WITH
THE LAND AND HOW TO GROW THEIR
OWN PRODUCE.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
INVESTIGATORS TODAY ZEROED IN ON
THE PAKISTANI WOMAN WHO,
ALONGSIDE HER HUSBAND, KILLED 14
PEOPLE IN WEDNESDAY'S ATTACK IN
SAN BERNARDINO, CALIFORNIA.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS ARE
NOW SEARCHING FOR CONNECTIONS
BETWEEN THE TWO ASSAILANTS AND
THE ISLAMIC STATE GROUP.
THE NEWSHOUR'S STEPHEN FEE HAS
MORE.
>> Reporter: NEW DETAILS EMERGED
TODAY ABOUT 29-YEAR-OLD TASHFEEN
MALIK, WHO POSTED HER ALLEGIANCE
TO THE ISLAMIC STATE ON FACEBOOK
THE SAME DAY SHE AND HER
HUSBAND, SYED RIZWAN FAROOK,
OPENED FIRE ON A HOLIDAY PARTY
FOR THE SAN BERNARDINO COUNTY
HEALTH DEPARTMENT, KILLING 14
AND WOUNDING 21.
TODAY, THE OFFICIAL ONLINE RADIO
STATION OF THE ISLAMIC STATE
SAID THE MASSACRE WAS CARRIED
OUT BY TWO "SUPPORTERS" OF THE
EXTREMIST GROUP BUT DID NOT
CLAIM RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE
ATTACK.
FAMILY AND FRIENDS IN THE U.S.
SAID THEY KNEW LITTLE OF MALIK.
HER RELATIVES IN PAKISTAN SAID
SHE BECAME A MORE DEVOUT MUSLIM
IN RECENT YEARS, SWITCHING FROM
WESTERN CLOTHING TO MORE
TRADITIONAL GARB.
SHE CAME TO THE U.S. ON A
FIANCEÉE VISA IN 2014.
LATE FRIDAY, POLICE TOWED AWAY
THE BLACK S.U.V. DRIVEN BY MALIK
AND FAROOK BEFORE BOTH WERE
KILLED IN A SHOOTOUT WITH
AUTHORITIES.
THE F.B.I. IS INVESTIGATING THE
KILLINGS AS AN ACT OF TERRORISM,
THOUGH SO FAR OFFICIALS SAY
THERE'S NO EVIDENCE THE ISLAMIC
STATE PLANNED THE ATTACK OR THAT
THE COUPLE WAS PART OF A TERROR
CELL.
THIS AFTERNOON, PRESIDENT OBAMA
MET WITH F.B.I. DIRECTOR JAMES
COMEY AND HIS SECURITY ADVISORS
FOR AN UPDATE ON THE
INVESTIGATION, AND, IN HIS
WEEKLY VIDEO ADDRESS, THE
PRESIDENT VOWED INVESTIGATORS
WOULD FIGURE OUT WHAT HAPPENED.
>> IT IS ENTIRELY POSSIBLE THAT
THESE TWO ATTACKERS WERE
RADICALIZED TO COMMIT THIS ACT
OF TERROR.
AND IF SO, IT WOULD UNDERSCORE A
THREAT WE'VE BEEN FOCUSED ON FOR
YEARS: THE DANGER OF PEOPLE
SUCCUMBING TO VIOLENT EXTREMIST
IDEOLOGIES.
>> Reporter: THE PRESIDENT ALSO
CALLED FOR NEW CONTROLS ON WHO
CAN GET GUNS.
>> FOR EXAMPLE, RIGHT NOW,
PEOPLE ON THE NO-FLY LIST CAN
WALK INTO A STORE AND BUY A GUN.
THAT'S INSANE.
IF YOU'RE TOO DANGEROUS TO BOARD
A PLANE, YOU'RE TOO DANGEROUS,
BY DEFINITION, TO BUY A GUN.
AND SO, I'M CALLING ON CONGRESS
TO CLOSE THIS LOOPHOLE NOW.
>> Reporter: AND THE "NEW YORK
TIMES" TODAY-- FOR THE FIRST
TIME IN NEARLY A CENTURY--
PUBLISHED A FRONT PAGE EDITORIAL
HEADLINED "THE GUN EPIDEMIC,"
CALLING FOR "ELIMINATING SOME
LARGE CATEGORIES OF WEAPONS AND
AMMUNITION."
>> Sreenivasan: AMONG THE
CONCERNS FOLLOWING THE MASS
SHOOTING IN SAN BERNARDINO IS
HOW THOSE LIVING IN THE UNITED
STATES MIGHT BECOME RADICALIZED,
AND THE CHALLENGES LAW
ENFORCEMENT FACES IN TRYING TO
TRACK SUCH INDIVIDUALS AND
PREVENT THEM FROM ACTING
VIOLENTLY.
FOR SOME INSIGHT, I'M JOINED BY
DAVID SCHANZER, WHO IS THE
DIRECTOR OF THE TRIANGLE CENTER
ON TERRORISM AND HOMELAND
SECURITY AT DUKE UNIVERSITY.
SO, DAVID, ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT PEOPLE HAVE BEEN STRUGGLING
WITH IS THAT THERE ISN'T ANY ONE
SINGLE PROFILE OF WHO IS GOING
TO DO SOMETHING LIKE THIS.
>> NO, THERE IS NOT.
WHEN WE LOOK AT THESE GROUP OF
PERPETRATORS AND WE CAN LOOK
BACKWARDS, WE DO REALIZE THAT
THEY SHARE SOME COMMON TRAITS.
THEY ARE OFTEN DISASSOCIATED
WITH FAMILY MEMBERS AND FRIENDS,
ARE LONERS, NOT DEEPLY EMBEDDED
IN THEIR COMMUNITY.
MANY OF THEM HAVE EXHIBITED SOME
FORMS OF DEPRESSION OR FORMS OF
MENTAL ILLNESS.
A LOT OF THEM HAVE HAD
FAMILIARITY OR EXPERIENCE WITH
FIREARMS.
BUT THEN, THOSE BEHAVIORS ARE SO
GENERALIZABLE AND THEY APPLY TO
SO MANY MILLIONS AND MILLIONS OF
PEOPLE IN THE UNITED STATES, IF
YOU'RE TRYING TO LOOK FORWARD
AND BE ABLE TO POINT OUT AND
SAY, WELL, YOU, THAT'S SOMEBODY
WE SHOULD REALLY PAY ATTENTION
TO, IT'S JUST VERY, VERY
DIFFICULT, IF NOT IMPOSSIBLE.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW DOES AN
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY PREVENT
SOMETHING LIKE THIS?
IT'S LIKE TRYING TO PREVENT A
SCHOOL SHOOTING OR SHOOTING UP A
PLANNED PARENTHOOD CLINIC.
>> WELL, IT REALLY IS.
SO, TO MY MIND THE BEST WAY TO
TRY TO DEAL WITH THESE THINGS IS
REALLY TO HAVE DEEP CONNECTIONS
BETWEEN OUR LAW ENFORCEMENT
AGENCIES AND COMMUNITIES,
BECAUSE IT'S GOING TO BE
FRIENDS, RELATIVES, COWORKERS
THAT MIGHT PICK UP ON SIGNALS OF
INDIVIDUALS THAT THEY HAVE
CHANGED, THEY MAY SAY THINGS
THAT SUGGEST THAT THEY MIGHT
WANT TO ENGAGE IN VIOLENCE.
SO, HAVING THOSE KINDS OF
RELATIONSHIPS OF TRUST AND
CONNECTIVITY IN COMMUNITIES IS
WHAT CAN POSSIBLY GIVE THE
POLICE SOME SORT OF EARLY
WARNING THAT AN INDIVIDUAL IS
HEADED DOWN A ROAD TO TOWARDS
VIOLENCE.
>> Sreenivasan: WELL, IN THIS
DAY AND AGE, WHEN YOU START TO
TALK ABOUT CONNECTIONS AND
COMMUNITIES, I AUTOMATICALLY
THINK OF SOCIAL MEDIA.
AND IT SEEMS THOSE ARE NOW
OPEN-SOURCE INDICATORS OF WHAT
SOMEONE'S THINKING.
THEY'RE OPTING INTO SHARING THIS
WITH PEOPLE.
>> WELL, ABSOLUTELY.
NOT ALL THESE INDIVIDUALS ARE
WELL TRAINED, HARDENED CRIMINAL
TERRORISTS.
A LOT OF THEM ARE, YOU KNOW,
CONFUSED INDIVIDUALS, AND THEY
MAKE MISTAKES.
THEY DON'T KNOW HOW TO CONCEAL
THEIR INTENTIONS.
AND, INDEED, THEY WANT TO BRAG
TO OTHERS, TO TALK ABOUT, AND SO
THEY'LL LEAVE CLUES ON SOCIAL
MEDIA.
THEY'LL SAY THINGS, AND I THINK
THAT'S A VERY FRUITFUL WAY FOR
LAW ENFORCEMENT TO TRY TO DEAL
WITH THIS BY LOOKING AT
OPEN-SOURCE MATERIALS, BUT ALSO
BECAUSE THEY CAN'T BE EVERYWHERE
ON THE INTERNET.
AGAIN, FRIENDS, COLLEAGUES,
PEOPLE THAT ARE ON THE INTERNET
AND SEE THESE THINGS, YOU KNOW,
THE TYPES OF STATEMENTS THAT
SUGGEST SOMEBODY IS REALLY
INTERESTED IN VIOLENCE, SHOULD
BRING IT TO THE ATTENTION OF
AUTHORITIES.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
DAVID SCHANZER OF DUKE
UNIVERSITY JOINING US FROM
CALIFORNIA, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> HAPPY TO BE WITH YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: WE TURN NOW TO
THE FIGHT AGAINST ISIS ABROAD.
FRANCE HAS STEPPED UP ITS AIR
STRIKES IN SYRIA SINCE THE
TERROR ATTACKS IN PARIS.
YESTERDAY, GERMAN LAWMAKERS
VOTED OVERWHELMINGLY TO SEND
RECONNAISSANCE JETS, A TANKER
PLANE AND A WARSHIP INTO THE
FIGHT.
THIS FOLLOWS WEDNESDAY'S VOTE
IN THE U.K. TO AUTHORIZE AIR
STRIKES AGAINST THE GROUP.
BUT WHAT KIND OF EFFECT WILL
THESE EFFORTS HAVE?
GEOFF DYER OF THE "FINANCIAL
TIMES" JOINS US NOW FROM
WASHINGTON, D.C.
SO, THE AMERICAN WARPLANES ARE
STILL DOING THE BULK OF THE
BOMBING, RIGHT?
>> THAT'S STILL THE CASE, BUT
THE IMPORTANT THING THAT
HAPPENED THIS WEEK IS THE MAIN
EUROPEAN POWERS VERY MUCH ON
SIDE WITH THE EFFORT TO GET TO
ISIS IN SYRIA, NOT JUST IN IRAQ
BUT IN SYRIA AS WELL.
WE HAD THE FRENCH COMING IN VERY
BIG AFTER THE PARIS ATTACKS, THE
GERMANS AND THE BRITISH THIS
WEEK.
POLITICALLY, THAT IS IMPORTANT
FOR THE ADMINISTRATION AS IT
TRIES TO MAKE THE CASE FOR
ESCALATING ITS CAMPAIGN IN
SYRIA.
IT'S VERY GOOD TO HAVE THE
EUROPEAN ALLIES ON SITE.
AND THE ACTUAL DAY-TO-DAY
PRACTICAL TERMS IT'S NOT GOING
TO MAKE A HUGE AMOUNT OF
DIFFERENCE.
THE BRITISH WILL BRING EIGHT NEW
PLANES INTO THE CAMPAIGN.
BUT, STILL, THE AMERICANS ARE
STILL GOING TO BE DOING THE BULK
OF THE AIRSTRIKES, THE BULK OF
THE INTELLIGENCE, THE BULK OF
THE RECONNAISSANCE.
>> Sreenivasan: NONE OF THESE
COUNTRIES HAS COMMITTED TO
PUTTING BOOTS ON THE GROUND,
RIGHT?
>> VERY MUCH NOT.
THE BRITISH AND THE FRENCH,
THEY VERY SPECIFICALLY SAID
THAT'S NOT WHAT THEY'RE GOING TO
DO AND THE ADMINISTRATION HAS
SAID IT DOES NOT WANT TO PUT
BOOTS ON THE GROUND IN SYRIA AS
WELL OTHER THAN A FEW SPECIAL
OPERATIONS FORCES.
YOU ARE SEEING THE REPUBLICAN
CANDIDATES TALKING ABOUT A MUCH
BIGGER U.S. PRESENCE ON THE
GROUND BUT FOR THE TIME BEING,
THAT'S VERY MUCH NOT ON THE
AGENDA.
>> Sreenivasan: GERMANY AND
FRANCE ALSO ANNOUNCED THEY ARE
GOING TO SPEED UP THEIR PLANS TO
BLOCK FUNDS FLOWING TO ISIS.
WHY DIDN'T THEY DO THAT SOONER?
>> THAT'S A VERY GOOD QUESTION,
AND I THINK PEOPLE ARE
ABSOLUTELY ASKING THAT VERY MUCH
SINCE THE PARIS ATTACKS,
ESPECIALLY AS THE U.S. HAS GONE
MORE AGGRESSIVELY AFTER ISIS'
OIL INFRASTRUCTURE OVER THE LAST
MONTH.
PEOPLE ARE ASKING WHY DIDN'T
THEY DO THAT EARLIER?
I THINK WHAT WE ARE SEEING IS A
MUCH GREATER URGENCY AMONG ALL
THESE COUNTRIES TO INTENSIFY
THE EFFORTS OF GOING AFTER ISIS.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE A
LONGER TERM PLAN TO TRY TO BUILD
MORE PARTNERS INTO THIS
COALITION OR ARE THEY SATISFIED
WITH WHO THEY HAVE NOW?
>> I THINK THE THING THAT VERY
MUCH FRUSTRATING THE
ADMINISTRATION IS THE HELP IT'S
BEEN GETTING FROM SOME OF ITS
REGIONAL ALLIES ON THIS FRONT.
IF YOU REMEMBER, WHEN AIRSTRIKES
IN IRAQ STARTED, YOU HAD THE
SAUDIS AND OTHER REGIONAL ALLIES
VERY PUBLICLY PRESENT TAKING
PART IN AIRSTRIKES, AND IN THE
LAST FEW MONTHS, PARTICULARLY AS
THEY HAVE BEEN BOGGED DOWN IN
THEIR OWN CAMPAIGN IN YEMEN,
THEY HAVEN'T BEEN AS PRESENT.
THEY ARE ALSO WORKING VERY HARD
WITH TURKEY.
THE ADMINISTRATION HAS PUBLICLY
CALLED OUT TURKEY ASKING TURKEY
TO DO MORE TO CLOSE OFF THE ONE
SECTION OF THE BORDER BETWEEN
SYRIA AND TURKEY WHERE ISIS
STILL HAS A SIGNIFICANT
PRESENCE.
>> Sreenivasan: WE HAVE TALKED
A LOT ABOUT THE MILITARY ELEMENT
OF IT.
WHAT ABOUT THE DIPLOMATIC SIDE?
>> WELL, THE DIPLOMATIC PROCESS
IS GATHERING A CERTAIN AMOUNT OF
MOMENTUM.
THERE WILL BE ANOTHER MEETING IN
TWO WEEKS' TIME IN NEW YORK.
VARIOUS COUNTRIES HAVE TALKED
ABOUT TIMETABLES FOR ELECTIONS.
THEY'RE TRYING TO PUT IN PLACE
PLANS FOR CEASE FIRES.
THE REAL BIG ISSUE, THE REALLY
DIFFICULT ONE THEY HAVE THE
PUNTED ON FOR THE TIME BEING IS
WHAT HAPPENS TO SYRIAN LEADER
BASHAR AL-ASSAD?
THE RUSSIANS ARE MUCH MORE-- THE
AMERICANS WOULD LIKE TO SEE HIM
LEAVE.
THE RUSSIANS ARE ON THE FENCE.
THEY HAVEN'T REALLY STATED
EXACTLY WHAT THEY WOULD LIKE TO
SEE HAPPEN.
THAT'S THE REALLY DIFFICULT
ISSUE THAT HAS TO BE CRUNCHED
OUT BEFORE THERE CAN BE ANY REAL
POLITICAL RESOLUTION.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
GEOFF DYER OF THE "FINANCIAL
TIMES" JOINING US FROM
WASHINGTON, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Sreenivasan: THE PRIME
MINISTER OF IRAQ, HAIDER AL
ABADI, CALLED ON TURKEY TO
WITHDRAW FORCES TRAINING IN
NORTHERN IRAQ TODAY, SAYING THAT
THE EXERCISES ARE A SERIOUS
BREACH OF IRAQI SOVEREIGNTY.
A TURKISH SECURITY OFFICIAL TOLD
REUTERS SEVERAL HUNDRED SOLDIERS
JOINED A CAMP NEAR THE CITY OF
MOSUL ON THURSDAY TO TRAIN IRAQI
TROOPS FIGHTING AGAINST ISIS
MILITANTS.
TURKISH TROOPS HAVE CONDUCTED
TRAINING EXERCISES FOR SEVERAL
YEARS IN THE KURDISH AUTONOMOUS
REGION FARTHER NORTH.
THE CITY OF MOSUL HAS BEEN UNDER
ISIS CONTROL SINCE JUNE 2014.
IN CHENNAI, INDIA, HUNDREDS MORE
RESCUE WORKERS WERE DEPLOYED
AFTER ONE OF THE WORST FLOODS IN
THE REGION'S HISTORY KILLED AT
LEAST 280 PEOPLE.
CLEARER SKIES ON FRIDAY ALLOWED
RESCUE OPERATIONS TO GO INTO
HIGHER GEAR, BRINGING HELP TO
RESIDENTS STRANDED ON ROOFTOPS
AND TRAPPED BY FLOODWATERS.
INDIA'S GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN
CRITICIZED FOR NOT REACTING FAST
ENOUGH TO THE DISASTER; MANY
AFFECTED AREAS STILL HAVE NOT
RECEIVED AID, AND 18 PEOPLE DIED
AFTER A FLOOD-RELATED POWER
OUTAGE SHUT DOWN A HOSPITAL'S
LIFE SUPPORT SYSTEMS.
NEWLY RELEASED REPORTS FROM THE
CHICAGO POLICE DEPARTMENT SHOW
DISCREPANCIES BETWEEN OFFICERS'
ACCOUNTS OF THE SHOOTING DEATH
OF LAQUAN McDONALD AND THE
DASHCAM FOOTAGE RELEASED IN
NOVEMBER SHOWING OFFICER JASON
VAN DYKE FIRING 16 SHOTS AT
McDONALD.
IN ONE OF THE REPORTS, THE
DEPUTY CHIEF OF PATROL SAYS
"OFFICER VAN DYKE FIRED HIS
WEAPON IN FEAR OF HIS LIFE WHEN
THE OFFENDER, WHILE ARMED WITH A
KNIFE, CONTINUED TO APPROACH AND
REFUSED ALL VERBAL DIRECTION."
ANOTHER OFFICER CLAIMS "IN
DEFENSE OF HIS LIFE, VAN DYKE
BACKPEDALED AND FIRED HIS
HANDGUN AT McDONALD TO STOP THE
ATTACK."
THE DASHCAM FOOTAGE SHOWED
McDONALD WALKING AWAY FROM
POLICE.
A CHICAGO POLICE SPOKESMAN
RELEASED A STATEMENT SAYING, "IF
THE CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION
CONCLUDES THAT ANY OFFICER
PARTICIPATED IN ANY WRONGDOING,
WE WILL TAKE SWIFT ACTION."
PROTESTS AND POLITICAL FALLOUT
HAVE RESULTED FROM THE VIDEO OF
THE SHOOTING; OFFICER VAN DYKE
WAS CHARGED WITH MURDER THE SAME
DAY THE VIDEO WAS RELEASED.
THE UNITED AUTO WORKERS UNION IS
CELEBRATING A HISTORIC VICTORY
AFTER SKILLED WORKERS AT THE
VOLKSWAGEN PLANT IN CHATTANOOGA,
TENNESSEE, VOTED LAST NIGHT FOR
UNION REPRESENTATION.
THE U.A.W. HAS TRIED TO UNIONIZE
FOREIGN-OWNED AUTO PLANTS IN THE
SOUTH FOR DECADES.
LAST NIGHT'S VICTORY INCLUDES
ONLY 11% OF THE AUTO PLANT'S
WORKERS; A VOTE TO UNIONIZE THE
ENTIRE PLANT LAST YEAR FAILED.
VOLKSWAGEN SAYS IT PLANS TO
APPEAL LAST NIGHT'S VOTE TO THE
NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD.
>> Sreenivasan: THE CLIMATE
TALKS THAT BEGAN LAST WEEK IN
PARIS HAVE REACHED THE HALFWAY
POINT, AND, EARLY THIS MORNING,
DELEGATES FROM 195 NATIONS
APPROVED A DRAFT TEXT THEY HOPE
WILL BE THE BASIS FOR AN
AGREEMENT TO REDUCE GLOBAL
CARBON EMISSIONS.
BUT THE FRENCH CLIMATE
AMBASSADOR CAUTIONED THAT THERE
ARE STILL MAJOR POLITICAL ISSUES
TO BE DEALT WITH BEFORE ANY
FINAL AGREEMENT IS REACHED.
FOR MORE, WE ARE JOINED VIA
SKYPE FROM PARIS BY MATT DALTON
OF THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL."
SO, MATT, HOW MUCH CLOSER ARE WE
TO AN AGREEMENT NOW THAN A WEEK
AGO?
>> Reporter: FRANKLY, I DON'T
THINK WE'RE THAT MUCH CLOSER.
THEY PRODUCED A TEXT.
THE TEXT HAS LOTS OF BRACKETS,
AND BRACKETS MEANS THAT THERE'S
NOT AN AGREEMENT ON THE LANGUAGE
THAT'S WITHIN THE BRACKETS.
AND, FRANKLY, MOST OF THE TEXT
IS WITHIN BRACKETS.
SO, THE GOOD NEWS IS THAT THERE
IS A TEXT, BUT THEY REALLY
HAVEN'T PRODUCED ANY CONSENSUS
OR ANY AGREEMENT ON ALL THE
ISSUES PROVING TO BE THE MOST
DIFFICULT IN THE TALKS.
>> Sreenivasan: COMPARED TO
OTHER CONVERSATIONS ABOUT
CLIMATE, IS THERE ANY MORE SENSE
OF URGENCY IN THIS SERIES?
THE REASON WHY THIS MEETING IS
SUCH A BIG DEAL IS THERE IS HOPE
NOW, AND THE HOPE COMES FROM THE
FACT THAT TWO BIGGEST EMITTERS
IN THE WORLD, THE UNITED STATES
AND CHINA, HAVE BOTH AGREED TO
LIMIT THEIR GLOBAL WARMING
EMISSIONS, AND IN FACT TO REDUCE
THEIR EMISSIONS AT SOME POINT.
THAT WAS ALWAYS THE BIG STICKING
POINT, THE BIG PROBLEM IN THESE
NEGOTIATIONS BEFORE.
SO, THAT HAS UNLOCKED THE
NEGOTIATIONS.
THE REST OF THE WORLD HAS SAID,
"WELL, THE TWO BIGGEST EMITTERS
ARE GOING TO DO THIS, THEN WE'RE
GAME TO TALK," AND I THINK
THERE'S A LOT OF POLITICAL
MOMENTUM BEHIND AN AGREEMENT.
IT'S JUST THE QUESTION OF
WHETHER THEY CAN SORT OUT THESE
DETAILS.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, WHAT ARE THE
MOST DIFFICULT STICKING POINTS?
>> THERE'S A QUESTION OF WHETHER
THE COUNTRIES SHOULD BE LIMITING
GLOBAL WARMING TO LESS THAN TWO
DEGREES SINCE THE START OF THE
INDUSTRIAL AGE OR LESS THAN 1.5
DEGREES CELSIUS SINCE THE START
OF THE INDUSTRIAL AGE.
A LOT OF DEVELOPING COUNTRIES,
PARTICULARLY COUNTRIES THAT ARE
MOST VULNERABLE TO CLIMATE
CHANGE, SAY THAT IF WE GET TO
TWO DEGREES OF WARMING, LARGE
SWATHS OF OUR TERRITORIES WILL
BE UNINHABITABLE.
SOME NATIONS WILL BE COMPLETELY
UNINHABITABLE AND WILL HAVE TO
MOVE.
SO, THEY'RE ARGUING THAT THIS
AGREEMENT NEEDS TO BE MUCH MORE
AMBITIOUS.
IT NEEDS TO KEEP GLOBAL WARMING
BELOW 1.5 DEGREES.
THEN, THERE'S THE ISSUE OF
FINANCE.
MONEY IS GOING TO MAKE THIS
WHOLE AGREEMENT WORK, MONEY FROM
THE DEVELOPED NATIONS TO HELP
DEVELOPING NATIONS TO LIMIT
THEIR EMISSIONS AND ALSO TO HELP
THEM ADAPT TO THE EFFECTS OF
GLOBAL WARMING.
DEVELOPED NATIONS HAVE PLEDGED
$100 BILLION ANNUALLY BY 2020.
THERE'S A QUESTION OF WHAT
HAPPENS AFTER 2020.
WHICH NATIONS ARE GOING TO PAY?
THE U.S., THE EUROPEAN UNION
AND OTHERS ARGUE THAT CHINA,
WHICH WAS ONCE CONSIDERED TO BE
A DEVELOPING COUNTRY, IS NOW
RICH ENOUGH THAT IT SHOULD
REALLY BE CALLED UPON TO PAY
PART OF THE BILL.
>> Sreenivasan: IF THERE IS AN
AGREEMENT REACHED, HOW BINDING
IS THIS?
>> A LOT OF COUNTRIES, THE
EUROPEAN UNION IN PARTICULAR,
WANT THIS TO BE LEGALLY BINDING
AND ENFORCEABLE, SOMETHING LIKE
AN INTERNATIONAL TREATY.
THE UNITED STATES HAS A PROBLEM
WITH THAT.
REPUBLICANS ARE GOING TO OPPOSE
ANY KIND OF GLOBAL WARMING
AGREEMENT.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION HAS
SAID, "WELL, GIVEN THAT WE CAN'T
MAKE THE EMISSIONS TARGETS THAT
ARE BEING NEGOTIATED HERE
LEGALLY BINDING ON AN
INTERNATIONAL LEVEL, THEY JUST
HAVE TO BE VOLUNTARY IN THAT
SENSE, AND THAT'S THE BEST WE
CAN DO."
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
MATT DALTON OF THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL" JOINING US HAVE A SKYPE
FROM PARIS TODAY, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: WE ASKED CLIMATE
EXPERTS: WHAT WOULD CONSTITUTE
SUCCESS AT THE PARIS TALKS?
READ THEIR COLUMNS ON ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: LAST TUESDAY,
PUERTO RICO MANAGED TO MAKE A
$354 MILLION PAYMENT ON $72
BILLION WORTH OF BOND DEBT TO
CREDITORS, DEBT THE PUERTO RICAN
GOVERNMENT SAYS IT CANNOT REPAY.
AS THE U.S. COMMONWEALTH
CONTINUES TO STRUGGLE, OFFICIALS
THERE ARE HOPING THAT BOOSTING
THE PUERTO RICAN AGRICULTURAL
SECTOR WILL HELP DIG THE ISLAND
OUT OF ITS ECONOMIC HOLE-- THAT
IS, PROVIDED THE TERRITORY CAN
FIRST SOLVE ITS LOOMING FOOD
CRISIS.
IN THIS UPDATED SEGMENT, THE
NEWSHOUR'S IVETTE FELICIANO
REPORTS ON HOW A GROWING NUMBER
OF SMALL ORGANIC PRODUCERS IN
PUERTO RICO BELIEVE THAT THE
SOLUTION STARTS BY "GOING
LOCAL."
>> Reporter: FOR TWO YEARS, CHEF
PAXX MOLL HAS BEEN PREPARING
"FARM-TO-TABLE" MEALS AT THE SAN
JUAN RESTAURANT, EL DEPARTAMENTO
DE LA COMIDA, WHICH MEANS "THE
DEPARTMENT OF FOOD."
"WHEN I COOK, EVERYONE'S A
V.I.P.," MOLL SAYS.
"YOU GIVE SOME OF YOUR SOUL AND
LOVE TO THE PERSON."
>>CUATRO LIBRAS DE HABICHUELAS,
15 QUESOS.
>> Reporter: MOLL WORKS WITH A
SMALL NETWORK OF PUERTO RICAN
FARMERS FOR THE RESTAURANT'S
ORGANIC, SIGNATURE DISHES, LIKE
THEIR FALAFEL-PLANTAIN FRITTERS
AND COCONUT FLATBREAD.
>> I THINK ITS FRESH FOOD WITH
PUERTO RICAN ESSENCE.
AND IT'S ALL LOCALLY GROWN,
WHICH MAKES IT UBER PUERTO
RICAN.
>> Reporter: YET GETTING QUALITY
INGREDIENTS FROM PUERTO RICO IS
NOT EASY.
ON THIS LUSH TROPICAL ISLAND,
MORE THAN 85% OF WHAT PEOPLE EAT
IS IMPORTED.
SEAFOOD, MEATS AND STAPLES LIKE
RICE AND BEANS AND COFFEE MOSTLY
COME FROM THE UNITED STATES,
NEIGHBORING LATIN AMERICAN
COUNTRIES AND EVEN CHINA.
THE MAIN REASON: PUERTO RICO'S
AGRICULTURAL SECTOR IS DISMAL,
REPRESENTING LESS THAN 1% OF THE
ISLAND'S GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT.
>> FROM CALIFORNIA OR CHINA, IN
A SHIP THAT GOES TO THE CANAL DE
PANAMA TO COME HERE, THAT'S,
LIKE, ONE, TWO, THREE, FOUR,
FIVE, SIX WEEKS.
>> Reporter: CARLOS REYES-
ALBINO, A FORMER CO-OWNER OF THE
RESTAURANT, SAYS THE ISLAND'S
DEPENDENCE ON IMPORTS MAKES IT
DANGEROUSLY VULNERABLE TO ANY
UNFORESEEN EVENT THREATENING ITS
FOOD SUPPLY.
>> A CATASTROPHE OR SOMETHING
HAPPEN WITH THE SHIPS, WHAT'S
GOING TO HAPPEN TO US?
>> Reporter: IN OCTOBER, A
PUERTO RICO-BOUND CARGO SHIP
FROM FLORIDA, "EL FARO," SANK
DURING A HURRICANE, COSTING THE
LIVES OF 33 CREW MEMBERS AND
ALSO THE LOSS OF 70 CONTAINERS
OF FOOD.
RIGHT NOW, PUERTO RICO'S
AGRICULTURE SECRETARY WARNS THE
TERRITORY ONLY HAS A ONE-MONTH
FOOD SUPPLY ON HAND.
SO, THE GOVERNMENT HAS
IMPLEMENTED A PLAN TO REDEVELOP
THE ISLAND'S AGRICULTURAL
SECTOR, PROVIDING FARMERS WITH
SUBSIDIES AND NEW EQUIPMENT.
ALREADY, IN THE LAST TWO YEARS,
PUERTO RICO HAS SEEN A 24%
INCREASE IN AGRICULTURE REVENUES
AND 6,500 NEW JOBS.
THE RESTAURANT EL DEPARTAMENTO
DE LA COMIDA IS ALSO TRYING TO
ENGAGE MORE LOCAL FARMERS.
>> THERE'S A LOT OF VARIETY
HERE.
THERE'S ANON, THERE'S
GRAPEFRUIT.
>> Reporter: FARMER DANIEL
CADENAS HAS BEEN PROVIDING THE
RESTAURANT WITH ORGANIC PRODUCE
FOR TWO YEARS.
>> I THINK IT'S REALLY POSITIVE
WHAT THEY'RE DOING, BECAUSE
THEY'RE HELPING PROMOTE WHAT IS
THE AGRICULTURE IN PUERTO RICO.
>> Reporter: CADENAS SPLITS HIS
TIME BETWEEN HIS FAMILY'S
MEDICAL BILLING BUSINESS AND
THEIR 25-ACRE FARM IN THE TOWN
OF CAROLINA, ABOUT 20 MILES
OUTSIDE OF SAN JUAN.
HE HOPES MORE PEOPLE IN PUERTO
RICO WILL SEE FARMING IN A NEW
LIGHT.
>> IT'S VERY IMPORTANT THAT
PEOPLE GET BACK TO THEIR ROOTS
AND THEY LEARN HOW TO DEAL WITH
THE LAND AND HOW TO GROW THEIR
OWN PRODUCE.
WE KIND OF HAVE LOST THAT OR
HAVE NOT DONE ENOUGH OF IT, AND
WE CAN DEFINITELY PRODUCE OUR
OWN AND WON'T HAVE TO DEPEND ON
AN OUTSIDE SUPPLY.
>> Reporter: THE SHORTAGE OF
LOCALLY-GROWN FOOD HERE RESULTS
FROM A DECLINE IN FARMING AND
SOCIAL STIGMA.
SUGAR WAS THE DOMINANT CROP, BUT
THE GRUELING AND LOW-PAYING WORK
ON MOSTLY AMERICAN-OWNED
PLANTATIONS GAVE RISE TO THE
TERM "JIBARO" FOR PEASANT, A
WORD ALSO SYNONYMOUS WITH
IGNORANCE AND POVERTY.
>> ABOUT POVERTY, ABOUT HAVING
PEOPLE FROM OTHER PLACES OWNING
OUR LANDS.
WE GOT THE PROBLEM THAT OUR
CULTURE LOOKS AT THE
AGRICULTURE, TOO, AS THE SUGAR
CANE.
>> Reporter: AN INTERNATIONAL
COLLAPSE IN SUGAR PRICES AFTER
WORLD WAR II LED PUERTO RICO TO
FOCUS MORE ON INDUSTRIALIZATION.
TODAY, THE ISLAND USES LESS THAN
A THIRD OF ITS AGRICULTURAL
LAND.
THE FOLKS AT THE RESTAURANT EL
DEPARTAMENTO DE LA COMIDA SAY
THEY'LL CONTINUE TO DO THEIR
SMALL PART TO GET PUERTO RICO ON
TRACK TO A SUSTAINABLE FUTURE IN
FOOD.
>> WE GOT THIS SLOGAN.
IT GOES, "YOU LOST AGRICULTURE,
YOU LOST THE SOCIETY," BECAUSE
AGRICULTURE IS THE FIRST STEP IN
EVERY KIND OF SOCIETY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND FINALLY, THE
SHIPWRECK OF THE SPANISH GALLEON
BELIEVED TO BE CARRYING A
FORTUNE IN GOLD COINS, SILVER
AND GEMS, HAS BEEN FOUND OFF THE
COAST OF COLOMBIA.
COLOMBIA'S PRESIDENT TWEETED THE
NEWS LAST NIGHT AND SAID THE
WRECK OF THE "SAN JOSE" FOUND
NEAR CARTAGENA COULD BE WORTH AT
LEAST $1 BILLION.
THE "SAN JOSE" WAS SUNK BY A
BRITISH WARSHIP IN 1708 WHILE
CARRYING ITS PRECIOUS CARGO FROM
SOUTH AMERICA TO SPAIN TO HELP
FUND THE SPANISH WAR OF
SUCCESSION.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.